docs: add tutorial about API migration (#1002)
data-apis/array-api: spec/draft/tutorial_api.md

(tutorial-api)=

> # Array API Tutorial - Migrating API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Array API Tutorial - Migrating APIs
```

The purpose of this tutorial is to show common patterns for migrating your APIs to

> the standard-compatible version in the least disruptive manner for users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a standard-compatible version in the least disruptive manner for users.
```

The patterns discussed in the document cover renaming functions and changing their
signatures, along with deprecation periods.

## Renaming a function

The first common migration is the need to rename a function to
the one that is present (or is semantically close enough) in the array API standard.

> Let's assume our API has a `transpose` function for permuting the axes of an array, but which has no matching name in the standard. Instead, the standard has a `permute_dims` API which performs the equivalent operation and is the function to which we want users to migrate. The original

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume our API has a `transpose` function for permuting the axes of an array, but which has no matching name in the standard. Instead, the standard has a `permute_dims` API which performs the equivalent operation. The original
```

function is as follows:

```py
def transpose(a, axes=None):
    ...
```

The first stage is to implement `permute_dims` and deprecate the old one with an
informative migration guide on what should be used instead:

```py
def permute_dims(x, /, axes):
    ...

def transpose(a, axes=None):
    warnings.warn("`transpose` function is deprecated, use `permute_dims` instead.", DeprecationWarning)
    ...
```

After a deprecation cycle and when you are ready to remove the deprecated function,
you should still leave hints for users in case they skipped deprecated versions.
One option is to track the names of deprecated and removed functions in `__getattr__` and
still inform users what has happened and what to do about it:

```py
# in your `__init__.py`

def __getattr__(attr):
    ...
    if attr == "transpose":
        raise AttributeError(
            f"`transpose` was removed in the ... release. use `permute_dims` instead."
        )
```

## Changing a function's signature

Another common pattern during migration to the array API standard is to modify
the signature of a function. The most troublesome parameters are keyword arguments
as it requires users to use the new name.

> For this scenario, suppose we want to update signature of `reshape` to match the one in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this scenario, suppose we want to update the signature of `reshape` to match the one in
```

the standard:

```py
def reshape(a, newshape):
    ...
```

We need to rename `newshape` parameter to `shape`, add a `copy` parameter, and enforce
new positional/keyword calling format.

After researching how users call our `reshape`, we decided to do the following: make `a` positional

> only without an extra deprecation message apart from changelog entry, make `shape`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only without an extra deprecation message apart from a changelog entry, make `shape`
```

> positional or keyword parameter, and make `newshape` and `copy` keyword only:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a positional or keyword parameter, and make `newshape` and `copy` keyword only:
```

(tutorial-api)=

# Array API Tutorial - Migrating API

The purpose of this tutorial is to show common patterns for migrating your APIs to

> the standard-compatible version in the least disruptive manner for the users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the standard-compatible version in the least disruptive manner for users.
```

The patterns discussed in the document cover renaming functions and changing their

> signatures, with deprecation periods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
signatures, along with deprecation periods.
```

## Renaming a function

> First common migration that might occur is the need to rename a function to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first common migration is the need to rename a function to
```

the one that is present (or is semantically close enough) in the array API standard.

Let's assume our API has a `transpose` function - the one that is not in the standard
under this name. Instead, `permute_dims` is present for permuting the axes of an

> array, so we can assume this is the one we want to migrate users to. The original

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume our API has a `transpose` function for permuting the axes of an array, but which has no matching name in the standard. Instead, the standard has a `permute_dims` API which performs the equivalent operation and is the function to which we want users to migrate. The original
```

function is as follows:

```py
def transpose(a, axes=None):
    ...
```

The first stage is to implement `permute_dims` and deprecate the old one with an
informative migration guide on what should be used instead:

```py
def permute_dims(x, /, axes):
    ...

def transpose(a, axes=None):
    warnings.warn("`transpose` function is deprecated, use `permute_dims` instead.", DeprecationWarning)
    ...
```

> After a deprecation cycle, when you are ready to remove the deprecated function,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a deprecation cycle and when you are ready to remove the deprecated function,
```

you should still leave hints for users in case they skipped deprecated versions.

> One option is to track deprecated & removed functions' names in `__getattr__` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One option is to track the names of deprecated and removed functions in `__getattr__` and
```

still inform users what has happened and what to do about it:

```py
# in your `__init__.py`

def __getattr__(attr):
    ...
    if attr == "transpose":
        raise AttributeError(
            f"`transpose` was removed in the ... release. use `permute_dims` instead."
        )
```

## Changing a function's signature

Another common pattern during migration to the array API standard is to modify
the signature of a function. The most troublesome parameters are keyword arguments
as it requires users to use the new name.

> For this scenario we are about to change `reshape` signature to the one in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this scenario, suppose we want to update signature of `reshape` to match the one in
```

the standard:

```py
def reshape(a, newshape):
    ...
```

> We need to rename `newshape` parameter to `shape`, add `copy` parameter, and enforce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to rename `newshape` parameter to `shape`, add a `copy` parameter, and enforce
```

new positional/keyword calling format.

> After researching how users call our `reshape`, we decided to: make `a` positional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After researching how users call our `reshape`, we decided to do the following: make `a` positional
```

only without an extra deprecation message apart from changelog entry, make `shape`
positional or keyword parameter, and make `newshape` and `copy` keyword only:

```py
def reshape(a, /, shape=None, *, newshape=None, copy=None):
    ...
```

This way users calling `reshape(arr, (ax1, ax2, ax3))` will not notice any change

> in the behavior of the function. Now we need to iron out other scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the behavior of the function. Next, we need to iron out other scenarios.
```

Users calling the function with a `newshape=...` need to receive a warning with
a proper recommendation, and the extreme case of both `shape` and `newshape` passed
needs to result in an exception:

```py
import warnings

def reshape(a, /, shape=None, *, newshape=None, copy=None):
    if newshape is not None:
        warnings.warn(
            "`newshape` keyword argument is deprecated, use `shape=...` or pass shape positionally instead.", DeprecationWarning,
        )
        if shape is not None:
            raise TypeError("You cannot specify `newshape` and `shape` arguments at the same time.")
        shape = newshape
    # proceed with `shape` argument
    ...
```

Once a deprecation period has passed, we replace the deprecation warning with

> a to a `TypeError`, with the same migration message as before:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a `TypeError` and use the same migration message as before:
```
